Proposal for a new video game:
Simulate a continent. Make biomes, then terrain. Then, introduce 100 ‘entities’, 
where an entity is an object with motivation. It has attributes like movement speed,
 health, abilities, etc. Simulate the world for N steps, then drop the player into the world. 
 The goal is to make the world feel alive, and to make the player feel like they are just a small part of a larger world. 
How would structures work? All entities have a structure preference. Some may have no structure preference at all. 
Structure preference is determined by procedural modeling via graph grammars. By making them motivation and not set in stone, 
there are opportunities for interaction. Like-minded (need to define) entities could cooperate. Adversarial entities could 
‘get in each others way’. 

The simulation should use a data-driven architecture in which Entity primarily owns attribute/state data 
while independent systems implement rules, dependencies, relationships, classification, and decision-making. 
Attributes such as patience, anger, courage, stress, and aggression should be represented as independent base, derived, 
temporary, environmental, or historical values, with dependencies defined through configuration or an attribute graph 
rather than hard-coded references between attribute classes (e.g., anger = f(patience, stress, provocation)). 
Separate systems such as AttributeSystem, RelationshipSystem, NeedSystem, MemorySystem, DecisionSystem, and 
IdentitySystem operate on this data. Entity identity should be derived bottom-up from attribute vectors rather than assigned 
through rigid species/archetype/role classes: archetypes define statistical distributions over attributes, and entities are 
classified using normalized weighted similarity or probabilistic distance, producing multiple concurrent classifications 
(e.g., Wolf=0.87, Hunter=0.71, Protector=0.63) across independent dimensions such as species, archetype, personality, role, 
profession, social identity, and behavioral pattern. Because classifications are derived from mutable attributes and experiences, 
identities can change dynamically and support hybrid or contradictory states without special-case code. The system should also 
distinguish objective classification, self-concept, and observer-specific social classification, allowing different entities or
 societies to maintain different beliefs about the same entity based on experience, reputation, culture, relationships, and 
 misinformation. The resulting architecture forms a feedback loop in which attributes drive behavior and experiences, experiences 
 influence classification and self-concept, and those identities subsequently influence future decisions and behavior; consequently,
  categories remain descriptive emergent properties of the simulation rather than control structures imposed by the developer.

ok, i want it to be a bit more complicated than that. on the edge of coding, if that makes sense. 
I envision that I'll provide players with presets (basically just a attribute list that players will have to research, 
and once obtained they manually adjust those parameters, so they learn the engineering), like a gatherer, a scout, a warrior, 
but players are encouraged to find their own pixels too.  This is because I want to force players to be creative. want a bomb? 
you have to make a pixel for that. want a cow that eats grass? you need a pixel for that. And because they are so abstract, 
players can name them what they want, and imagine up their real world equivalent. A pixel that stands on a stone tile and 
gets a stone resource out may be called a miner to one person, but for another its a 'stone factory', (idk). 
so design the pixels around that. also, make a list of attributes that they can unlock like a tech tree,
 starting with like 5 beginner attributes and then expanding from there

The tech tree

Tier 0 (start here, five attributes):

Speed: how fast it moves.
Sight: how far it perceives.
Health: how much damage it survives.
Tether: stays within a radius of a home point (or of its owner).
Grab: picks up a resource from the tile it stands on.

These five already let players make a scout, a worker and a patrol, and they teach the three ideas of moving, sensing and taking.

Tier 1 (unlocked by using tier 0):

Carry: holds more than one resource.
Deposit: drops resources at a home or structure.
Strike: damage, range and cooldown (first combat).
Lifespan: dies after N seconds, cheaper but temporary.
Appearance: color, size and shape (visual identity).
Energy store: a bigger energy reserve.

Tier 2 (the conversion and targeting layer):

Filter: restricts what actions target, by tag (tile, pixel or team).
Extract: converts a tile tag into a resource at a rate.
Consume: eats a tagged pixel or resource for energy.
Produce: converts energy or resources into a resource.
Identity tag: names the pixel's own tag for others to target.
Spawn: creates a pixel from a saved blueprint (costs resources, has a cooldown).

Tier 3 (reactions and social behavior):

On death / On contact / On timer / On hurt: the four trigger types, each paired with an effect.
Area effect: an effect that hits a radius (explosions, healing).
Follow / Flock: moves relative to a chosen pixel or group.
Aggro: what it chases, and what makes it angry (attacked, trespass, theft).
Stealth: invisibility, with a detection range that counters it.
Click action: what the pixel does when the player clicks it.

Tier 4 (engineering):

Status effect: temporary slow, rally, weaken or shield on other pixels.
Build: places a tile or structure (ties to your WFC and grammar work).
Signal: sends or receives a named message on a channel, so pixels can coordinate.
Condition: adds "only if energy above X" or "only if enemy within R" to any reaction.
Memory: remembers a location or target.
Mutate: changes into another blueprint when a condition is met (larva to adult, for example).
Extra rule slots / Capacity boost: more complexity room.

Maybe i do:
Continent
Biomes
Terrain
Entities


Notes on blocks:
each block is a feature vector of
{shape
material
structural_role
surface
biome
temperature
permeability
opacity
hardness
tags[]
etc...
}


Notes on graph grammers: 
grammers must be predifined: village architecture, city architecture, forrest, haunted, etc. These predefined grammers must also have defined constraints (blocks are given attribute tags, some of which must be preserved) in order to blend grammers, we need to make use of these constraints. 

So we first build the world. Then we spawn entities (those ARE our civilizations). They are given attributes, including a GRAPH GRAMMER. Based on those, they are given a species. They are then given building blocks based on their biome and species. They then have free reign to build as theyd like, but they may only do one action per turn, same as all other entities. It then becomes a simulation of entities either building, moving, fighting, trading, etc. The player can pause at any time and join the game. 

Every time an entity wants to build in a given area, it checks if another entity wants to build in that same area. If no, build. if yes, check if they are cooperating or nah. if they cooperate, blend the two styles together and continue building. 
if they do not cooperate, make them fight!

When a player STOP GENERATION, place bots in the biome, change entities to be more NPC, and play! (entities out of the players radius can continue to simulate?)